The Guardian | Opinion | 2025-12-02
By Zoe Williams
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2025/dec/02/refillable-advent-calendars-children

Why did I ever buy my kids refillable advent calendars?
------------------------------------------------------------
Maybe 10 years ago, I bought permanent Advent calendars for the kids: Scandi-looking Christmas houses with 24 tiny drawers, from Sainsbury’s. I think my original plan was that some of the draws could contain something other than chocolate, not because I’m the kind of almond mum who won’t let anyone eat sweets before breakfast, but because their dad and I are separated and have them half the time each, so it wasn’t unusual for them to wake up and have six Lindt chocolate balls to chomp through before they’d opened their curtains. The tiny drawers are a curse. Some years I could only find stuff for one of the kids (erasers in the shape of hedgehogs; lip balm); other years, a different one was in luck (Lego Yodas; magnets). It was never, ever fair. One year, I found tons of different batteries for the drawers, and I thought it was the most genius thing I’d ever done, but they said: “How is this a fun gift? If we needed a battery, we’d just go to the kitchen drawer, which is supposed to have batteries in it.” I realised in about 2019 that I’d just have to start planning earlier, around July, if I wanted to strike the perfect balance of parity, festivity and usefulness, and that was a good year, actually. I found some tiny business cards with swear words on them that they could just leave around the house, and ear-splitting whistles and unisex lip balm. We have enough erasers and pencil sharpeners now to last until nobody ever makes a mistake because the written word is just a memory. Then, wham, this year it happened: I forgot. One minute it was November and all about the fireworks. Never in my wildest dreams did I think it would be December next. Whatever goes in those drawers now, it’ll have to be so good, and so surprising, and so unprecedented to make up for this. I’m going to need 72 reptile eggs. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist
