The Guardian | Opinion | 2025-11-28
By Kerry O'Brien
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2025/nov/28/press-freedom-is-being-destroyed-from-gaza-to-america-dont-think-it-cant-happen-here

Press freedom is being destroyed from Gaza to America. Don’t think it can’t happen here
------------------------------------------------------------
First things first. It would be remiss of me not to refer specifically to the appalling and outrageous casualty list of Palestinian journalists and other media workers in Israel’s war on Gaza since the brutal attack by Hamas on Israeli citizens two years ago. Having excluded independent global media access inside Gaza, leaving us all to rely on local journalists to bear witness to the devastating effect of Israel’s bombardment on the civilian population of Gaza and the famine that has accompanied it, Israel has failed dismally to explain with any credibility why so many journalists have been killed. Importantly, what we should acknowledge is the impact those Palestinian journalists have had in return for their sacrifice. They have confronted the world with powerful evidence that has gradually taken on the look and feel of genocide in real time – in our living rooms as well as the corridors of the UN and its agencies. It is significantly due to the courage and stubborn determination of those journalists that no reasonable citizen of the world has been able to look away. In a world that is becoming more and more ill-liberal, including now the most powerful democracy of all, the message is becoming stark for our own country. When the president of the United States sits in the White House with the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, as he did a week ago, and seeks to dismiss the brutal murder and dismemberment of Saudi journalist and Washington Post writer Jamal Khashoggi by agents of the Saudi government as: “things happen” – THINGS HAPPEN – and castigates the journalist who dares to ask the Crown Prince about it, it illuminates just how far the ground has shifted for journalism in the United States. All those massive lawsuits against mainstream media outlets Donald Trump regards as the enemy, that are designed to intimidate against continuing to chronicle his alarming demolition job on the institutions that underpin democracy in America, are testament to the clear and present danger for a strong, free, effective and independent media everywhere. And don’t kid yourself it can’t happen here. On this night six years ago, as chair of the Walkley Foundation, I highlighted a rare unity of purpose within our industry called the Right to Know coalition to pressure the Morrison government to strengthen press freedom in Australia after separate federal police raids on the ABC’s Sydney headquarters and journalist Annika Smethurst’s home in Canberra. Nine days later, December 7, 2019, Anthony Albanese, as opposition leader, attacked the Morrison government for its failure to support press freedom, in which he referred to the raids as reflecting “something sinister”. There have been two parliamentary inquiries into press freedom since then, with some 30 recommendations for reform, and Albanese has now been prime minister for three-and-a-half years, but still raids like those on both the ABC and Smethurst could happen again, with a not terribly robust hurdle to jump. In his 2019 speech, Albanese declared “journalism is not a crime. It’s essential to preserving our democracy.” One test of his resolve would be to deliver uniform national shield laws to allow journalists to protect their sources without the threat of imprisonment. But today, although there are shield laws of one sort or another in place in every state as well as nationally, the overall framework has been likened to Swiss cheese, and despite ongoing appeals there’s no obvious sign of a process to harmonise shield laws. In 2019, Albanese said, “We don’t need a culture of secrecy. We need a culture of disclosure.” Well, in 2023, his government’s own formal review put the number of secrecy provisions in commonwealth law at 875. Two years later, there are more, not fewer secrecy offences. Not a good sign. “Protect whistleblowers,” Albanese said in 2019. “Expand their protections and the public interest test.” We’re waiting on the government’s revised whistleblower reforms to be tabled in parliament, and if it’s still wedded to the establishment of a whistleblower ombudsman, rather than a strong independent whistleblower protection authority casting a wider net, then we should be seriously disappointed that the government has fallen short of the expectation Albanese raised six years ago. The lives of whistleblowers, David McBride and Richard Boyle, were upended because they were courageous enough to blow the whistle, in one case, on war crimes in Afghanistan, and the other, on indefensible debt collections on behalf of the tax office. One big test of this government’s credibility will be whether a McBride or a Boyle would still face jail in the future under the new laws. Right now, that’s still possible. If these things are not in the public interest, what on earth is? “Reform freedom of information laws so they can’t be flouted by government,” Albanese said in 2019. But we’re told his proposed new freedom of information laws will have the opposite effect. So on reflection, this government’s scorecard against the benchmarks Albanese set in 2019 as opposition leader is mixed. He’s certainly talked the talk, and to a degree he’s walked the walk, but given what’s at stake now – and I haven’t even mentioned where AI is going to take us even five years from now – we as an industry cannot afford to lose sight of important unfinished business. And in that regard, where is the Right to Know coalition now? The one that united our industry six years ago? Our broad challenges are growing, not lessening. In September, the remarkable Filipino-American journalist Maria Ressa addressed our National Press Club. Her shared Nobel peace prize in 2021 – in her case, for safeguarding freedom of expression in the Philippines, particularly during the authoritarian reign of Rodrigo Duterte – brings compelling authority to the warning note she sounded directly to Australia. Ressa contends that: “The greatest threat we face today isn’t any individual leader or one government. It’s the technology that’s amplifying authoritarian tactics worldwide enabled by democratic governments that abdicated their responsibility to protect the public … Tech platforms have become weapons of mass destruction to democracy.” If you haven’t seen her speech, do so, as a priority. She commends Australia for taking on the digital giants with a world-first social media ban for children under 16 but says it was a mistake for the government to abandon its proposed law to tackle disinformation on digital platforms last year. We’ve caught the world’s attention on this. Let’s not stop there. No one, including Ressa, is saying it’s easy. But we all have to be invested in this. Let’s not allow ourselves to get intimidated or derailed by those who would seek to distort the concept of freedom of speech for money and power. After all my decades in journalism I have an unshakable belief in an unquenchable public hunger for news that informs, that feeds our curiosity and fires our imaginations; that stimulates crucial debate and can be trusted. That hunger is not just going to evaporate. And if we think we’re doing it tough trying to cut through the shroud of institutional secrecy, or trying to call out those who would polarise our communities for grubby political ends, remind yourself of those journalists in Gaza or Ukraine, or Russia or China, or Myanmar or Afghanistan who’ve been shut down or gone to prison, or gone to their graves for an ideal – for seeking to report the truth. We are all one community of journalists and there’s something powerful we can harness in that, that we should never lose sight of. That’s really why we’re here tonight. Thank you. Kerry O’Brien is a journalist, former editor and host of ABC’s 7.30 and Four Corners and winner of six Walkley awards including the Gold Walkley and the Walkley for outstanding leadership. This is an edited excerpt of his speech to the Walkley awards on 27 November 2025
