The Guardian | Culture | 2025-10-31
By Guardian staff
https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2025/oct/31/stephen-colbert-ex-prince-andrew

Stephen Colbert on ex-prince Andrew: ‘Pervert formerly known as prince’
------------------------------------------------------------
Late-night hosts spoke about Donald Trump’s trip to Asia and how he refuses to accept criticism while also reacting to ex-prince Andrew being stripped of his royal title. Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert spoke about Trump’s recent trip to parts of Asia, including South Korea where he negotiated tariffs with Xi Jinping, China’s president. Colbert played awkward footage of the two in front of cameras, adding that he was “not confident we’re gonna win this one”. The talks ended up with both sides agreeing to what amounted to a pre-tariff status quo yet Trump has been “telling everyone he won the negotiations big time” saying that he would rank the meeting as a 12 out of 10. Colbert joked that he “must have been insufferable as a teenager” telling friends he went to 14th base with girls which means “over the bra, under the hat”. This week also saw Kash Patel, the FBI director, take the FBI’s private jet to go on a date, “a stunning ethical violation” that saw him take his 26-year-old girlfriend to a wrestling match which was part of an unscripted wrestling league founded by Hulk Hogan. He remarked that it “does not sound like the most romantic date”. Colbert said that there are “many signs that America has hit a bit of a rough patch” but this week the country hit “rock bottom” with the announcement that viral teen slang 6-7 has become 2025’s word of the year, according to Dictionary.com. He said the “word of the year has to be a word” and joked that it was like the time that Playboy announced its playmate of the year as 8. Reportedly, schoolteachers begged those at Dictionary.com not to make it the word of the year but Colbert added: “Don’t worry teachers if anything will kill this trend it’s being mentioned here on CBS.” He moved on to ex-prince Andrew, “the guy who used to hang out with Jeffrey Epstein who’s not Donald Trump” who has just been stripped of his royal title. Colbert spoke about the controversial email that was the “royal straw that broke the peasant’s back” adding that “maybe men shouldn’t have friends”. He joked that his new title will be “pervert formerly known as prince”. Jimmy Kimmel On Jimmy Kimmel Live! the host spoke about Halloween at the White House, which saw Trump give children candy as well as Be Best postcards. “I didn’t know Be Best was still a thing,” he said. Kimmel also spoke about his trip to parts of Asia, joking that “he avoided Vietnam just for old time’s sake”. Trump has also been testing nuclear weapons again which Kimmel claimed was a response to him losing the Nobel peace prize as next time he is “gonna take it by force”. It’s now been a month of government shutdown which has led to infighting within the Republican party such as vocal anger from Marjorie Taylor Greene, a surprise to many. Kimmel said she was someone “who didn’t just drink the Kool-Aid, she chugged it”. He joked that “sometimes you go so far right you come out on the other side”. Her annoyance over the situation and with some of Trump’s decisions has led to pushback from Ted Cruz. “It feels like Jurassic Park when the velociraptors turn on the guys running the place,” Kimmel said. He also added that Cruz “can go trick or treating without a mask”. Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers also spoke about Trump’s trip to parts of Asia, which rightwing media has branded “a resounding success”. He played a clip of a Fox News pundit complimenting his handshake with Xi Jinping, saying it clearly showed who owned the room. “No one in American history has been worse at handshakes than Donald Trump,” Meyers said in response, noting that there is an entire Wikipedia article titled Donald Trump and handshakes. After Chuck Schumer called the trip “a total dud”, Trump claimed it was “almost treasonous” to use such words. Meyers joked that “the real treason is when your detractors get sassy”. Meyers also said that Trump “likes going abroad” because “here at home everyone’s mad at him”.
