The Guardian | Culture | 2025-11-05
By Adrian Horton
https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2025/nov/05/miss-piggy-movie-jennifer-lawrence-emma-stone-cole-escola

Miss Piggy movie on way from Jennifer Lawrence, Emma Stone and Cole Escola
------------------------------------------------------------
Miss Piggy is getting the movie star treatment, courtesy of Jennifer Lawrence and Emma Stone. A feature film about the diva puppet is in the works at Disney, which owns the rights to the Muppets franchise, Variety reported on Wednesday. Lawrence and Stone will serve as producers, working with a script from Oh, Mary! creator Cole Escola. “I don’t know if I can announce this but I am just going to … Emma Stone and I are producing a Miss Piggy movie and Cole is writing it,” Lawrence revealed on Las Culturistas podcast hosted by Bowen Yang and Matt Rogers. When the excited cohosts asked whether Lawrence and Stone, longtime friends and two of the most successful film actors of their generation, would co-star in the project, Lawrence teased: “I think so. We have to … It’s fucked up [that we haven’t done a movie together].” Lawrence also revealed that she considered making her Broadway debut in Oh, Mary!, Escola’s historical farce that has seen a range of actors from Jane Krakowski and Tituss Burgess fill the role of Mary Todd Lincoln. The intensely physical comedy, for which Escola won the Tony for best actor in a play, reimagines the former first lady as a historically clueless, alcoholic, aspiring cabaret singer who benefits greatly from her husband’s assassination. “The whole thing is a joke she’s in on,” Lawrence told the podcast. “I felt like I could be big and in on the joke.” She decided not to pursue the role, she said, after considering the physical rigor of Broadway’s punishing eight-shows-a-week schedule. “I don’t think I would be good at [theater] … It’s all your body and voice,” she said. “The only time I wanted to do theater was I wanted to do Oh, Mary! They were like, ‘It’s eight shows a week and six weeks of rehearsal.’ I was like, ‘Do you have daycare there?’ It just wouldn’t have worked.” Lawrence is currently promoting Die, My Love, a psychological thriller of a crumbling marriage in which she stars opposite Robert Pattinson. Stone’s latest film, Bugonia, a dark conspiracy theory comedy that marks her fifth collaboration with director Yorgos Lanthimos, premiered last month; she won her second best actress Oscar, in 2024, for her role in Lanthimos’s Poor Things. The Miss Piggy feature film, should it materialize, will be the character’s first solo outing since Jim Henson debuted her in 1976. The prima donna started as a chorus pig on Henson’s The Muppet Show before gradually becoming a bigger part of the series, and stealing the spotlight from her froggy beau Kermit. As the Muppets characters celebrate their 70th year, Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg announced last month that they would refresh The Muppet Show for its 50th anniversary. A Disney+ special, featuring guest star Sabrina Carpenter, will air in 2026, with an expected new series to follow.
