The Guardian | Culture | 2025-11-18
By Unknown Author
https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2025/nov/18/why-dont-conservatives-get-credit-for-culture-funding

Why don’t Conservatives get credit for culture funding?
------------------------------------------------------------
Helen Marriage, a hugely respected cultural leader, writes that “there is no political party that will commit to the kind of investment needed to keep a living art and culture ecology alive” (Durham’s Lumiere festival was a beacon of hope and togetherness – we cannot let the lights go out on the rest of the arts, 11 November). But she also places the responsibility on all of us. She wants the culture sector to make a better case. But can it? As commissioner for culture in the last government, I remain surprised that large funding decisions directed at culture have been forgotten, devalued and ignored, perhaps because the sources were then from a Conservative government. During Covid, culture was the only economic sector to receive its own rapid, specially designed, comprehensive rescue package. The £2bn culture recovery fund took care of more than 5,000 organisations around the country. Many large regional funds, such as those for levelling up, towns and borderlands, directed billions into culture-led projects. Aviva Studios in Manchester, Bristol Beacon, V&amp;A East, Shakespeare North in Prescot, Wentworth Woodhouse in Rotherham and the incipient Eden Project in Morecambe are just a few examples – all hugely ambitious culture and heritage projects funded by the government, working closely with local authorities. Film tax reliefs are vital to encourage inward international investment. But when Rishi Sunak ensured tax credits were also extended to theatre, museums and orchestras, where was the welcome? When the Arts Council announced its (increased) funding round in 2022, there was ferocious negative attention directed on the few organisations that were unsuccessful in their bids and no focus at all on the 275 organisations funded for the very first time all over the country. Follow the money. These were very large chunks of funding directed to the culture sector. Privately, some culture leaders were thrilled, but it was a gratitude that had to be hidden. The majority of recipients were silent because the Conservative narrative doesn’t fit their worldview. Of course, there’s much more that can be done. But if the culture sector won’t recognise and welcome attention from politicians of all parties and the hard graft of officials when it lands, they can’t expect politicians to stay the course – they must follow their voters. Neil Mendoza Conservative, House of Lords; commissioner for culture, Department for Culture, Media and Sport, 2020-2023
