The Guardian | Culture | 2025-11-05
By Guardian staff
https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2025/nov/05/stephen-colbert-trump-pelosi

Colbert on Pelosi calling Trump a vile creature: ‘You know who agrees? Most Americans’
------------------------------------------------------------
Late-night hosts looked back on comments made by Nancy Pelosi about Donald Trump and examined the last-minute campaigning for the New York mayoral race. Stephen Colbert On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert spoke about the big night for New York. He said that election night in the US is known internationally as “Guys, come look, they’re about to do something stupid!” He spoke about Zohran Mamdani’s late campaign push, hitting multiple clubs and bars in an episode that was taped just before the Democratic candidate made history winning the majority of votes. His major competition, Andrew Cuomo, picked up endorsements from Elon Musk, Eric Adams, George Santos and Stephen Miller, AKA “everyone New Yorkers love”. Colbert also joked that support came from “subway seat puddle” and “your neighbour with the trumpet”. This week also saw Nancy Pelosi call Donald Trump a “vile creature” and the “worst thing on the face of the Earth”. Colbert said that would place him in between “eating half your sandwich before realising it’s moldy” and “that fish in the Amazon that swims up your peehole”. He added: “You know who agrees with Nancy Pelosi? Most Americans.” Because this week a new opinion poll was published showing that Trump has reached a new second-term low in his approval rating with a showing of 37%, down from 47% in mid-February. The week also saw the death of Dick Cheney, at the age of 84. Colbert said that his family are “asking well-wishers, in lieu of flowers, to please shoot a friend in the face”. Jimmy Kimmel On Jimmy Kimmel Live! the host spoke about the California vote over redistricting, joking that whatever the result was, “Trump’s just gonna redraw everything with a Sharpie himself”. The president has already called the vote “unconstitutional” and “a giant scam”, which Kimmel said were “also adjectives someone might use to describe him”. He moved on to the New York mayoral race, calling Eric Adams a “clownishly funny” mayor who will next be seen on Dancing With the Stars. It was also day 35 of the government shutdown and Trump has threatened to delay Snap benefits, something his press secretary had to walk back immediately. It would affect 42 million people, a sign of callousness that explains why “his kids are like that”. Kimmel added: “The guy who never missed a happy meal in his life is deciding who gets to eat in this country.” The administration was ultimately forced into an agreement to pay half and it all led Kimmel to announce that he would be helping local organisations with a “big beautiful food bank” in the studio’s parking lot, asking viewers for food donations. Trump was also asked this week about former prince Andrew being stripped of his royal title as a result of the Jeffrey Epstein association. He told reporters he felt “very badly” for the royal family. Kimmel said it was “like Bill Cosby feeling bad for R Kelly” and there were also dozens of photos of Trump and Andrew together. Ticket sales at the Kennedy Center have also plummeted since Trump took over and demanded less “woke” programming with sales at 57%, down from 93% this time last year. “Everything he touches dies,” Kimmel said before joking: “Good news, Melania, you’re gonna live forever.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers also spoke about the big New York election day, talking about a recent CNN profile of Mamdani’s wife. “Bad news ladies, he’s married, and even worse news, Cuomo isn’t,” he joked. This week has also seen Trump threatening possible military action in Nigeria on social media which led the Pentagon head, Pete Hegseth, to reply: “Yes, sir.” Meyers called it “gross” and said they were “like those couples who wish each other happy anniversary on Facebook”. Sotheby’s is also set to auction off a sculpture of a solid gold toilet called America, which led Meyers to joke: “I don’t know if that’s fair though since the toilet actually works.”
