The Guardian | Culture | 2025-10-27
By Caroline Davies
https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2025/oct/27/steve-coogan-to-pay-damages-to-defamed-academic

Steve Coogan says Richard III film was ‘story I wanted to tell’ as he agrees to libel settlement
------------------------------------------------------------
Steve Coogan has said his film about the discovery of the remains of Richard III was “the story I wanted to tell, and I am happy I did” after he and two production companies agreed to pay “substantial damages” to settle a high court libel claim over the film’s portrayal of a senior university administrator. Richard Taylor, deputy registrar at the University of Leicester at the time of the find, sued Coogan, his production company Baby Cow, and Pathe Productions for libel over his portrayal in the 2022 film The Lost King, which follows the amateur historian Philippa Langley and her search for the king’s skeleton. Taylor’s lawyers had asserted previously that he was portrayed in the film as “devious”, “weasel-like” and a “suited bean-counter”. Judge Lewis had ruled previously that the film portrayed Taylor as having “knowingly misrepresented facts to the media and the public” about the find, and as being “smug, unduly dismissive and patronising”, which had a defamatory meaning. The case was due to proceed to trial, but lawyers for Taylor read an agreed statement to the court on Monday saying the parties had settled the claim. William Bennett, KC for Taylor, told the court: “Mr Taylor contended that the depiction of him in this untrue way in the film caused serious harm to his professional and personal reputations and caused enormous distress and embarrassment to him.” As well as paying substantial damages, the defendants had also agreed to pay his legal costs, and make an onscreen clarification stating that the portrayal of Taylor was “fictional and does not represent the actions of the real Mr Taylor”, and that he “acted with integrity during the events portrayed”. After the hearing, Langley said on her website that she had intended to appear as a witness for the defendants at trial as she wanted a judge to “independently come to a decision in this matter”, but was unable to do so due to ill health. Coogan said in a statement he would have “preferred” for a judge to rule on the case, and it was “unfortunate” due to Langley’s ill health they were unable to put evidence before the court, and that the film was “Philippa Langley’s story”. He said Langley had instigated the search for Richard III, insisted on the dig in the area of the car park where the remains were found and raised the majority of the money for his exhumation. “If it wasn’t for Philippa Langley, Richard III would still be lying under a car park in Leicester. It is her name that will be remembered in relation to the discovery of the lost king, long after Richard Taylor has faded into obscurity.” “That is the story I wanted to tell, and I am happy I did.” Coogan, Baby Cow and Pathe were not represented in court and did not attend. In the film, Taylor, played by Lee Ingleby, is shown as antagonistic towards Langley, played by Sally Hawkins, who spearheads the dig and is sidelined by academics when they seek to take credit for the discovery. Langley’s husband is played by Coogan, who co-wrote the script with Jeff Pope. In 2022, Taylor told the BBC: “I’m portrayed as kind of a bullying, cynical, double-crossing, devious manipulator, which is bad, but then when you add to that I behave in a sexist way and a way that seems to mock Richard III’s disabilities, you start to get into the realm of defamation.” Bennett said in his statement to the court that Langley “caused the remains to be found by driving forward a project to search for them” in the car park in Leicester city centre more than 500 years after the monarch’s death. He said the University of Leicester had also played a “crucial role in providing funds and academic expertise” for the project, with Taylor the “key coordinator of the university’s involvement”. Speaking outside court, Taylor, now chief operating officer at Loughborough University, said he had felt “cross” and “completely helpless” when the film was released. He said the outcome of his libel case represented “success and vindication” after “a long and gruelling battle”. Taylor said Langley’s initiation of the project and “driving confidence” had made it possible for Richard III to be found. He added: “Hers was a remarkable contribution. But it did not extend to leading the archaeological search or scientific analysis, for which she was neither qualified nor experienced. “There have been moments over the last three years when I thought, when Philippa Langley approached me for the university’s support, I perhaps should have put the request in the bin, but I didn’t, and I think I was right not to do that. “It was a fantastic piece of academic work involving volunteers, involving the Richard III Society, involving academics, from many, many universities, on an international scale. I think it’s a truly remarkable discovery, a really strong piece of teamwork.” A joint statement from Coogan, Pathe and Baby Cow said: “As a distributor and producer recognised for bringing complex, real-life stories to audiences, we are deeply aware of the responsibility that comes with such portrayals and approach each project with care, integrity, and a commitment to authenticity. “We remain incredibly proud of this film and are pleased this matter has now been settled.” • This article was amended on 28 October 2025 to remove references to Richard Taylor as an academic. He was a senior university administrator at the time.
