The Guardian | Sport | 2025-12-03
By Angus Fontaine
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/dec/03/wallabies-must-improve-as-world-cup-draw-delivers-daunting-all-blacks-clash

Wallabies must improve as World Cup draw delivers daunting All Blacks clash 
------------------------------------------------------------
If the Wallabies are to fight their way to a World Cup triumph in front of their home crowds in 2027 they must first face off with arch-rivals New Zealand in the pool stages. The showdown between the traditional TransTasman rivals was set in stone at the tournament’s draw in Sydney on Wednesday night and will likely launch the six-week campaign of the 11th Rugby World Cup at Optus Stadium in Perth on 1 October 2027. The Wallabies will enter their home Cup outside the top seedings, ranked No 7 in the world and coming off a winless European tour for the first time since 1958. “We didn’t have a good November, it’s impossible to hide from that,” coach Joe Schmidt admitted last night of Australian rugby’s first 10-loss season. “It was an emotional rollercoaster of a year. But there were glimpses … and we can build on those glimpses.” Australia’s other Pool A rivals are Hong Kong China, playing in their first ever World Cup, and Chile, the world No 17. But the men in gold must still finish at least second in their pool, then win in the Round of 16 knockout stages, possibly against a Japan side coached by Eddie Jones, architect of their disastrous 2023 Cup campaign. The Kiwi-born Schmidt welcomed Australia and New Zealand being cast in the same pool for the first time in World Cup history and duelling at the tournament for the first time since 2015. “It’s exciting,” the 60-year-old said with a grin. “New Zealand will be looking at Australia thinking, ‘We know what we’re up against and it’ll be personal’. It’s a Trans-Tasman battle at a World Cup and I think both teams are going to love it.” The winner of the match will likely top Pool A, and set up a quarter-final with South Africa, should the reigning World Cup champions top Pool B as expected, pitted as they are against underdogs Romania, Georgia, and world No 10 Italy. Aside from Australia v New Zealand, the draw throws together other ancient rivals early too, with Scotland and Ireland meeting in Pool D and England clashing with Wales in Pool F. Mapping the paths and permutations to the finals is something retired Wallabies skipper James Slipper won’t miss. “The mental battle of a home World Cup is a beast in itself,” the veteran said after drawing the pools alongside All Blacks great Dan Carter. “With friends and family in the stands comes expectation. The Wallabies will feel that pressure but if they can deal with it, a home crowd can be really powerful.” And as Japan proved with their shock defeat of South Africa in the first pool game of the 2015 World Cup, rankings count for nothing in a World Cup furnace. With 250,000 international visitors expected to attend RWC 2027 and A$1.3bn projected to be splashed by travelling rugby fans across the seven host cities, Australian rugby and its fans will come out a winner, regardless of how the Wallabies perform. Although Schmidt will hand over Australia’s World Cup campaign to incumbent coach Les Kiss from mid-2026, he denied there were plans to stay on in any official role. “I’ll be in the stadium watching,” he smiled. “Rugby World Cups are special. Atmosphere builds into a crescendo on match days. I’m excited it’s only two years away now … but in other ways I can’t wait to not be involved because it’s pretty nerve-racking!” Wallabies fans know how Schmidt feels. After winning World Cups in 1991 and 1999, the code has slipped way behind Australian Rules and rugby league in the affections of fans, sponsors and broadcasters. But winning regularly in 2026 and playing the hard-running, crash-tackling blitzkrieg style Kiss favours could turn fortunes fast. “The challenge is to win seven games straight,” says Slipper. “That takes discipline.” Schmidt pointed out Australia may have four Tests against New Zealand in 2026 and 2027 before they meet at the Cup, plenty of time to size up and maybe sucker punch their old foes. And there’s a warm-up starting next year too. “In 2026 the Nations Championship will see these 24 teams go head-to-head in preparation for the World Cup,” said the body’s chairman, Brett Robinson. “That’s fabulous for our sport.” Pool A: New Zealand, Australia, Chile, Hong Kong China Pool B: South Africa, Italy, Georgia, Romania Pool C: Argentina, Fiji, Spain, Canada Pool D: Ireland, Scotland, Uruguay, Portugal Pool E: France, Japan, USA, Samoa Pool F: England, Wales, Tonga, Zimbabwe
