The Guardian | Sport | 2025-11-30
By Exclusive by Matt Hughes
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/nov/30/middlesex-ccc-chief-executive-andrew-cornish-investigated-after-complaint-staff-member-cricket

Middlesex CCC chief executive investigated after complaint by staff member
------------------------------------------------------------
The Middlesex County Cricket Club chief executive, Andrew Cornish, has taken leave of absence from the club following an allegation of misconduct made by another member of staff. The Guardian has learned that Middlesex have handed the complaint over to the Cricket Regulator, which has launched an investigation into the matter. Cornish is understood to have stepped away from the club 10 days ago. Middlesex declined to comment when contacted by the Guardian, but the club’s board is expected to inform staff on Monday about Cornish’s absence. Cornish denies any inappropriate behaviour, and he has claimed to be unaware of the details of any complaints made against him. He also declined to comment when contacted by the Guardian, but is understood to have told colleagues within cricket that he has taken some time away from Middlesex for personal reasons. The investigation into Cornish has come a critical time for Middlesex, who will meet members at Lord’s on Tuesday in a separate meeting for talks over the future of the club. As the Guardian revealed in August, Middlesex have had offers from two international investment groups over a funding deal that would enable the club to build a permanent home away from Lord’s. Securing external investment may require Middlesex to take the club into private ownership, which would need the’ approval of their members in a formal ballot. Cornish has been leading the investment process and would ordinarily have presented the club’s plans to members. The club’s chairman, Richard Sykes, is expected to take the lead at the members’ forum on Tuesday. The Cricket Regulator is an independent disciplinary and compliance body that was set up by the England and Wales Cricket Board in 2022 after its governance system was criticised by MPs following complaints of racism by the former Yorkshire cricketer Azeem Rafiq. Middlesex have faced two other recent investigations from the newly formed regulator. In September 2023 Middlesex was fined £50,000 and given a suspended points deduction by the Cricket Discipline Commission, the body that hears cases after charges are brought by the regulator, after being found guilty of spending central funding allocated for grassroots programmes on its first team. In June 2024 the club was charged by the regulator after receiving complaints about the alleged behaviour of a senior member of staff. In November 2024 Middlesex was cleared of improper conduct following a disciplinary hearing by the CDC. That complaint is understood to have not been about Cornish. Cornish was appointed by Middlesex four years ago after initially joining the club in September 2020 as a consultant. He was previously chief executive at Somerset, who sacked him in 2019 amid concerns over the club’s financial performance. The Cricket Regulator declined to comment on the investigation into Cornish.
