The Guardian | Sport | 2025-12-01
By Melissa Jacobs
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/dec/01/in-the-nfls-season-of-meh-even-the-battered-49ers-are-super-bowl-contenders

In the NFL’s season of meh, even the battered 49ers are Super Bowl contenders
------------------------------------------------------------
The 49ers’ season felt over after Week 6’s loss to Tampa Bay. Yes, they were 4-2. Yes, they were tied with the Seahawks and Rams and had already won head-to-head games against both. But that’s when they hit rock bottom. All Pro linebacker Fred Warner was the latest casualty, following in the footsteps of All Pro edge rusher Nick Bosa with a season-ending injury. Brock Purdy had also struggled with injuries. George Kittle was hurt in Week 1. Both were not expected to return for several games. Brandon Aiyuk had no plans to play any time soon, at least not for San Francisco. By Week 7, the only big names in action were Christian McCaffrey and Trent Williams. Dire as the 49ers appeared on paper, they hung in. It helped that the Cardinals, Falcons, Giants, and Panthers featured in their upcoming schedule. They beat all four of them, losing only to the Texans and Rams in the next few weeks. None of the wins inspired much confidence, though. The Cardinals outgained the 49ers by 200 yards. Purdy threw three interceptions against the Panthers. Finally, on a windy day in Cleveland, the 49ers looked like they belonged in the playoff conversation. Sunday’s 26-8 win was the franchise’s first in Cleveland since 1984. There was nothing splashy stat-wise, just smart, mistake-free football against one of the league’s top defenses. Purdy was efficient, going 16-of-29 for 168 yards and one touchdown. He ran in another on a third-and-goal read-option. Purdy had solid protection and was sacked just once by Myles Garrett, a great accomplishment this season. Robert Saleh’s defense dominated as Clelin Ferrell and Keion White broke through with key sacks. And Skyy Moore’s 66-yard punt return in the first-quarter set the tone for the game. As 49ers beat reporter David Lombardi points out, the last 49ers win in Cleveland came the week after a four-interception game by Joe Montana. The 49ers would go on to win the Super Bowl that year. That outlook is a stretch for this group. Purdy is not Montana, and there is no healthy defender on the current 49ers roster at the same level as Ronnie Lott. That group was 15-1. This crew is 9-4 and sitting as the seventh seed in the playoff picture. There remains a lot of patchwork throughout the roster. But there is one stark advantage for the modern 49ers – there is no outstanding team in the NFL this season. There is no longer certainty that Patrick Mahomes will lead the Chiefs to a dramatic comeback, no matter the odds. Or that Josh Allen can control a game with his legs. Or that Bo Nix and Drake Maye will be able to handle the pressure come playoff time. In the NFC, the once magical Lions have no identity and a bevy of issues on defense. The Rams are the NFL’s most complete team but don’t have a sure-thing offense. The Eagles were wildly outcoached by Ben Johnson and the Bears, the No 1 seed at the moment, are missing a lot of pieces. The only sure thing in the NFL in 2025 is the shrewdness of a handful of coaches. The 49ers’ Kyle Shanahan is, of course, among them. As are Johnson and Sean McVay. Mike Vrabel, Sean Payton, and Brian Schottenheimer are also coaches youdon’t want your team facing in the playoffs. That’s what so strange about this season. Some rosters are far more compelling than San Francisco’s. But there is no quarterback playing like Tom Brady, Peyton Manning or peak-era Mahomes. So the competitive advantage may ultimately lie in coaching. Factors like preparation, aggressiveness, and team chemistry probably mean a lot more this season. If that remains the case, don’t count out the 49ers. MVP of the week Bryce Young, QB, Carolina Panthers. In a wild back-and-forth victory for the Panthers over the Rams, Young reminded us why he was once the NFL’s No 1 overall pick. Young went toe-to-toe with Matthew Stafford and the Rams’ sensational offense as well as the team’s top-rated defense. In the 31-28 upset win, Young threw three touchdowns, no interceptions and was 15-of-20 for 206 yards. He brought the magic when it counted most, going 2-for-2 for 76 yards and two touchdowns on fourth down. His third touchdown was on third and eight. It doesn’t get more clutch. Young’s play has been inconsistent (see his game against San Francisco last week), and one lights-out performance won’t convince the skeptics. But against the Rams, Young showed Carolina all the intangibles he brings, especially heart. With the win, there is a plausible chance Young gets a taste of the postseason. The 7-6 Panthers are half a game behind the NFC South-leading Bucs, and the two teams face off twice before the end of the season. Stat of the week 76. Thank goodness for Josh Allen’s legs because his arm wasn’t getting it done Sunday. Allen’s eight-yard rushing touchdown in the fourth-quarter not only cemented the Bills’ 26-7 win over the Steelers, it gave him sole possession of the NFL record for rushing touchdowns by a quarterback, with 76. He had previously been tied with Cam Newton. The game’s star quarterbacks, Allen and Aaron Rodgers, struggled to get their offenses going. Allen ended the first half with just 51 passing yards and an interception. A head-butting altercation with Steelers defensive tackle Cam Heyward seemed to fuel Allen and the Bills to a much cleaner and efficient second-half. Allen hit Keon Coleman for a score after a nice pump fake. But it was James Cook’s 144 rushing yards that sealed the Bills’ victory. With the win, the Bills keep pace as the seventh seed in the AFC. They face the Joe Burrow-led Bengals next. Video of the week “I know you guys are hungry for more, right? The city of Chicago is hungry too,” Bears head coach Ben Johnson proclaimed in the team’s raucous locker room after Friday’s win over the Eagles. Then he ripped his shirt off. The fired-up players encircling Johnson knew why. So too did Bears fans. Free hot dogs for all! The Wiener Circle, a hot dog stand that has become a Chicago institution, promised free hot dogs if Johnson took off his shirt after a Bears victory. To say Johnson has won over Chicago is an understatement. The Bears are 9-3, winners of five straight, NFC North leaders, AND currently the No 1 seed in the NFC after the Rams’ loss. The confidence instilled by Johnson was on full display in Philadelphia. Chicago bullied the Eagles, especially in the trenches. The Bears run game had its way thanks to a combination of shrewd playcalling and elite blocking. D’Andre Swift and Kyle Monangai rushed for over 100 yards, the first time since 1985 the Bears had two 100-yard rushers in a game. The defense held its own, limiting Saquon Barkley to 56 yards on 13 carries. They also stopped a fourth-down tush push. The Bears were sharper, controlled the tempo, and simply seemed to want it more. That’s the Ben Johnson effect. Elsewhere around the league • Bucs tackle Tristan Wirfs – all 320lbs of him – provided a fun spark, hauling in his first-ever touchdown in his team’s 20-17 win over the Cardinals. The big guy touchdown came after two other “touchdowns” on the same drive were nullified by penalties. • Extra-point drama in the Colts-Texans game! No, your eyes did not deceive you. Texans kicker Ka’imi Fairbairn clearly missed an extra-point wide left but the refs called it good, and the play wasn’t reviewable. “Since the ball was above the upright it’s not reviewable,” referee Clay Martin said after the game. The touchdown was also aided by a phantom pass interference call on Colts cornerback Kenny Moore. The Texans went on to win the game between two teams battling for the AFC South title, and the contest did not need such substandard officiating. • Northern Ireland’s Charlie Smyth, a graduate of the NFL’s International Pathways Program, had a pretty good start to his pro football career. The former Gaelic footballer drilled a 56-yarder with his first attempt in the NFL and also had an onside kick recovered, although his team lost 21-17 to the Dolphins. Smyth only learned he was playing at late notice and had to rush his family over the Atlantic to Miami to see the game. “If we had to wait another three or four hours longer, I don’t think it would have been possible,” Smyth said, revealing his parents and sisters had suffered delays on the way over. “It was so awesome to see them here.” • Continuing our special teams debut special: Jaguars nose tackle DaVon Hamilton subbed in as his team’s long snapper after an injury to Ross Matiscik in the first quarter. He successfully snapped on a field goal, extra point and three punts. “That was very exciting,” Hamilton said. “Definitely not something I want to do on a day-to-day basis. I’m going to leave this to Ross. But it was fun.” Hamilton’s snaps helped the Jags to a 25-3 win over the Titans, which puts them top of a tight race in the AFC South over the Colts and Texans. • Just another routine catch for Puka Nacua. And don’t get us started on Brock Bowers. And Treylon Burks, come to think of it.
