The Guardian | Sport | 2025-11-29
By Guardian sport
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/nov/29/imran-sherwani-great-britain-olympic-hockey-hero-dies-aged-63

Imran Sherwani, Great Britain Olympic hockey hero, dies aged 63
------------------------------------------------------------
Imran Sherwani, who starred in the Great Britain hockey team that won Olympic gold in 1988, has died at the age of 63, his family have announced. Sherwani revealed in 2021 that had he been diagnosed with young-onset Alzheimer’s in 2019, and his family continue to raise awareness of the condition. He represented Great Britain and England 94 times, culminating in scoring two goals in his team’s 3-1 final victory over West Germany in Seoul. Sherwani’s second goal, which in effect clinched the contest, sparked a famous reaction from BBC commentator Barry Davies, who asked: “Where were the Germans? But frankly, who cares!” It sparked British hockey’s greatest moment for thousands watching at dawn back home in the UK. Imran was the third Asian player to play for GB after Sutinder Kehar and Kulbir Bhaura, his 1988 teammate. He came from a sporting family – his father played hockey for Pakistan and his great uncles played football for Stoke City and Port Vale. Recalling his greatest moment with the winning goal in Seoul, Sherwani said: “Batch [Steve Batchelor] did the German and I just carried on for his pass and met it as it came across and slotted home. It was just incredible and I think we knew then. It felt like that was it. I still get emotional about it. The win, the team, it is all just a fantastic story and I am privileged and fortunate enough to be part of it.” Rich Beer, chief operating officer of Great Britain Hockey, said: “Imran Sherwani will forever be remembered as one of the true icons of England and Great Britain Hockey. His talent, leadership and humility inspired generations of players and fans alike.” Leek Hockey Club said: “Imran was one of Leek HC’s greatest players and arguably their most influential. He joined Leek in 1996 and was the catalyst for an unprecedented period of success. “Whilst it would seem inconceivable to many that his greatest achievement wasn’t the two goals scored to win gold for Great Britain in the 1988 Olympic final, Imran often insisted the 6-2 win against Old Georgians securing Leek promotion to the National League at Belle Vue in 2003 was his proudest moment. “Imran was not only a great hockey player but a great person and will be sadly missed by all at Leek Hockey Club.”
