The Guardian | Sport | 2025-11-29
By Martin Pegan
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2025/nov/29/aflw-grand-final-live-north-melbourne-kangaroos-v-brisbane-lions

North Melbourne beat Brisbane: AFLW 2025 grand final – as it happened
------------------------------------------------------------
Thanks a lot for following along as history was created in multiple ways as North Melbourne defeated Brisbane by 40 points in the AFLW grand final at Ikon Park. We’ll have more on the ruthless Roos in the coming days, but for now you can dive into the match report. North Melbourne foundation player, and a premiership player last year, Nicole Bresnehan presents the cup to Jasmine Garner. Bresnehan has missed almost all of this season due to a torn ACL but gets to play her part in the trophy lift. Kangaroos skipper Jasmine Garner and coach Darren Crocker have their say with the latter especially keen to emphasise the historic phrase “back-to-back”. The near-flawless, and certainly ruthless, Roos have not only won 27 matches in a row – they are the first AFLW side to win two consecutive premierships. The best on ground award goes to Eilish Sheerin after the Roos recruit put together a high quality first half that helped set up the victory. Sheerin finished wtih 28 disposals, nine clearances and two goals in her first decider after moving across from Richmond to join North Melbourne at the end of last year. Brisbane captain Breanna Koenen is close to tears as she thanks her teammates and acknowledges that North Melbourne have put together a special season as the competition benchmark. 27 wins in a row, that’s absolutely unreal. You’ve been the better team all year and you were just too good today. But I have had the absolute best week, so many memories and laughs. I wouldn’t want to do it with anyone else. To be in our seventh grand final as a club is incredible. FT: North Melbourne 9.2.56 – Brisbane 2.4.16 The record-breaking Roos have completed their AFLW fairytale with their 27th consecutive victory sealing a second flag – and the competition’s first back-to-back premiership. Brisbane threw everything at North Melbourne but, just as they have all season, the reigning premiers had all the answers as they end an undefeated season of domination with a commanding 40-point victory. Q4: 2 mins remaining: North Melbourne 9.1.55 – Brisbane 2.3.15 The Kangaroos are able to move the ball at ease with the Lions’ pressure finally dropping away. They have been gallant this evening, but the Roos have been out on their own all season. Blaithin Bogue has been quiet and is not quite able to win a foot race against two Lions defenders and boot a late goal. Q4: 4 mins remaining: North Melbourne 9.1.55 – Brisbane 2.3.15 Ball magnet Ash Riddell racks up records like she does disposals. This year’s AFLW Best and Fairest breaks the record for the most disposals in a grand final as she reaches 36 touches. Another honour might well be on the way to the Roos midfielder. Q4: 6 mins remaining: North Melbourne 9.1.55 – Brisbane 2.3.15 Ball magnet Ash Riddell racks up records like she does disposals. This year’s AFLW Best and Fairest breaks the record for the most disposals in a grand final as she reaches 36 touches. Another honour might well be on the way to the Roos midfielder. Q4: 8 mins remaining: North Melbourne 9.0.54 – Brisbane 2.3.15 The Lions bounce out of the middle with the clearance and look half a chance to score before Jasmine Ferguson desperately leaps to rush the ball through for a behind. Even with the Roos more than six goals in front, they want to finish the way they have started. Q4: 9 mins remaining: North Melbourne 9.0.54 – Brisbane 2.2.14 Jenna Bruton has her third goal – just. The Roos winger wraps up Natalie Grider in a tackle to earn a free kick 20 from goal, and only barely gets the ball over the pack. Q4: 11 mins remaining: North Melbourne 8.0.48 – Brisbane 2.2.14 Jenna Bruton steps back with the flight of the ball and marks on the centre wing as Jade Ellenger arrives late and gives away a 50m penalty. That’s the fourth 50m penalty against the Lions tonight, and Bruton is the latest to make them pay. Q4: 14 mins remaining: North Melbourne 7.0.42 – Brisbane 2.2.14 The party is just about getting started as Jasmine Garner boots her first goal of the night. The Roos skipper only needs a hint of space to kick her 99th AFLW career goal as Bob Marley’s classic Jammin’ rings out. One more for the Roos skipper would be the icing on the cake. Q4: 16 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 2.2.14 Bella Dawes is back fighting for the ball against three North Melbourne players. The margin might count against her being best-on-ground, but it has been a mighty performance from the Lions midfielder. Brisbane wouldn’t have too many cards left up their sleeve after a gallant effort during the third term but will surely resort to a play-on-at-all-times approach from here. It is easy to assume North Melbourne will cool things down with a kick-mark game. But they’re just as likely to put the foot down and finish their season with yet another statement win. Here we go … Brisbane have thrown everything at North Melbourne in that third term but the margin remains the same as it was at the main break. Q3: 1 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 2.2.14 The Lions keep the foot down but a miskick from Svarc into the forward 50 lands in Riddell’s hands and Davidson eases the pressure by giving away a lazy 50m penalty. Q3: 4 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 2.2.14 The Lions need another goal to make the most of their time on top as they lead the Roos 8-6 for inside 50s this term. Q3: 6 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 2.2.14 The Lions burst forward with one of the plays of the game as Bella Dawes twice wins a contest when outnumbered and helps get the ball to Dakota Davidson. But the attack falls down just 20m from goal. Brisbane might be matching North Melbourne’s energy at the moment, but they are still lacking a cutting edge. Q3: 8 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 2.2.14 Brisbane have lifted their intensity this term and deserved their goal. It looks like they are going to roll the dice with rapid but risky ball movement to try to find a way pass the Roos defence. Q3: 10 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 2.2.14 Brisbane have a sniff as Ruby Svarc boots their first goal since the early exchanges. The long ball has hurt the Lions for much of this grand final, but this time they get over the Kangaroos defence and the goalsneak is quickest to the drop. Q3: 12 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 1.2.8 The Lions defence continues to battle hard to close down the Kangaroos’ attack after attack. But the exit routes remain closed and it feels like a matter of time before the floodgates open. Q3: 14 mins remaining: North Melbourne 6.0.36 – Brisbane 1.2.8 Tahlia Randall is on the charge and launches over a pack to pull down a perfectly weighted pass from Ash Riddell. A clinical finish extends the Roos lead. Q3: 16 mins remaining: North Melbourne 5.0.30 – Brisbane 1.2.8 Ominous signs as North Melbourne pick up where they left off and burst away from the ball-up. Both sides are back on Ikon Park with the second half about to get under way. Expect the Lions to come out breathing fire if a pumped-up Bella Dawes gets her way (sound up). Lucy Single takes out the half-time sprint with Zippy Fish second. But Jess Hull might need to stick to running after totally fluffing her role as starter. Half-time sprint: Seven of the quickest players in the AFLW – and a Diamond in the rough from the Australia netball team – are lining up for the traditional half-time sprint. I’m not sure how middle-distance star Jess Hull would go over 100m but I’m guessing she wouldn’t be too sluggish. The Olympic silver medallist is watching on this time, as we have Ebony Marinoff (Adelaide), Georgie Prespakis (Geelong), Lucy Single (Gold Coast), Molly O’Hehir (Melbourne), Zippy Fish (Sydney), Ella Roberts (West Coast), Ellie Blackburn (Western Bulldogs) and Jo Weston (Australian Diamonds) getting ready to run. I’m with the headline writers in tipping Zippy Fish. The Kangaroos prized recruit Eilish Sheerin has looked at home in her first AFLW grand final with 15 disposals, four clearances and two goals. But it was this year’s W Award winner Ash Riddell who set the tone in open play with 12 disposals just in the second term as the Roos broke the game wide open. Charlotte Mullins and Isabel Dawes (14 disposals) have been important for the Lions, while Sophie Conway has also battled hard. But Brisbane will need to tidy up their forward 50 entries to stay in the game let alone reduce the margin against an all-conquering opponent playing like they are on a mission. After a shaky start the Kangaroos are showing just why they are on a 26-match winning streak as their smart set up across the field, neat disposal and ferocious intensity proves too much for the Lions to handle. Q2: 2 mins remaining: North Melbourne 5.0.30 – Brisbane 1.2.8 A second goal for Eilish Sheerin and the Roos prized recruit is having a huge impact on her first AFLW grand final. The former Tiger has an equal game-high 14 disposals and four clearances to go with her pair of goals. Q2: 4 mins remaining: North Melbourne 4.0.24 – Brisbane 1.2.8 The Lions just can’t find a way to convert while on top 7-4 inside 50s for the term, with only one behind to the Roos’ two goals. Bella Dawes brings Eilish Sheerin down in a tackle then sends the ball deep into attack. That duo have been among the best on ground so far. Q2: 6 mins remaining: North Melbourne 4.0.24 – Brisbane 1.2.8 The Lions aren’t doing much wrong as the intensity has noticeably lifted around each and every contest. But the Roos are just set up in the ideal positions and a critical touch cleaner on their way out of defence. Q2: 8 mins remaining: North Melbourne 4.0.24 – Brisbane 1.2.8 The Kangaroos have four in a row. Jas Garner marks just outside the 50m and briefly considers bombing the ball to the top of the goalsquare. But Jenna Bruton is standing in a prime position and gladly collects the deft kick, then nails the set shot. Q2: 10 mins remaining: North Melbourne 3.0.18 – Brisbane 1.2.8 The Kangaroos defence is set up like a wall across the middle of Ikon Park as the Lions are unable to find a way out. Not sure how much longer they can hold on under the relentless Roos pressure. Q2: 12 mins remaining: North Melbourne 3.0.18 – Brisbane 1.2.8 The Lions are a little flat after giving up a ridiculous cheap goal to the reigning and minor premiers. That was the Roos first inside 50 of the term, but they are racking them up now as the ball is locked in their forward half. Q2: 14 mins remaining: North Melbourne 3.0.18 – Brisbane 1.2.8 Oh, my. A 100m penalty. And Kate Shierlaw makes the Lions pay. The Roos key position player takes a mark and is shoved back towards the ground by Shannon Campbell. Shierlaw sets off to claim her initial 50m penalty and Campbell’s attempts to stay in front of her opponent cost her another 50m. It’s a tough rule but equally horrible game awareness from the Campbell and not what the Lions needed after a promising period. Q2: 14 mins remaining: North Melbourne 2.0.12 – Brisbane 1.2.8 In a repeat of the first term the Lions lock the ball forward but this time Orla O’Dwyer is unable to convert a set shot as the Roos have time to reset. Q2: 16 mins remaining: North Melbourne 2.0.12 – Brisbane 1.1.7 The second term gets under way much the same as the first with the Lions winning the initial clearance. The swing between the Lions opening few minutes as they locked the ball forward, and the Roos overpowering them as the first term went on, is shown in some of the ket statistics. Disposals: 74-59 Uncontested possessions: 43-29 Clearances: 9-4 Inside 50s: 7-10 A strong start from the Lions but the Kangaroos fought to get the game back on their terms and take a narrow lead into the first change. The was a red-hot opening term. Q1: 2 mins remaining: North Melbourne 2.0.12 – Brisbane 1.1.7 Erika O’Shea wins the ball across half-back and launches an attack that ends with Emma King flying high to mark just inside the 50m arc. The key forward quickly plays on to pick out Bella Eddey in a better position about 30m out and directly in front. Eddey goals. The Roos are back on top. Q1: 4 mins remaining: North Melbourne 1.0.6 – Brisbane 1.1.7 The pressure is mounting on the Lions defence as the Kangaroos take their turn to lock the ball forward. Q1: 6 mins remaining: North Melbourne 1.0.6 – Brisbane 1.1.7 The Lions have controlled the territory early to more than double the Roos’ inside 50 count, but there is a sense that the tide is turning as the reigning premiers tidy up their kicking. Sophie Conway has been busy for the Lions and no surprise that Jasmine Garner is already finding plenty of the footy. Q1: 8 mins remaining: North Melbourne 1.0.6 – Brisbane 1.1.7 Last week’s preliminary final between North Melbourne and Melbourne had a strong claim to being the best contest we have seen in the AFLW. This could clash could be a new contender. Both sides are being physical at the contest and clean with their disposal, as each defence is put under pressure early. Q1: 10 mins remaining: North Melbourne 1.0.6 – Brisbane 1.1.7 The reigning premiers open their account with a slice of good fortune. The looked to be incorrect disposal from the ruck contest but Eilish Sheerin pounces on the loose ball, shrugs off Shannon Campbell with a classic don’t argue, then snaps truly. Q1: 12 mins remaining: North Melbourne 0.0.0 – Brisbane 1.1.7 The Kangaroos win the ball out of centre clearance but it bounces straight back as the Lions attack swiftly between the arcs. Erika O’Shea wins the race with Ruby Svarc to knock the ball through for a behind. But the Lions are on top early. Q1: 14 mins remaining: North Melbourne 0.0.0 – Brisbane 1.0.6 First blood to the Lions. Charlotte Mullins wraps up Jasmine Ferguson in the perfect tackle and the Roos defender has no option but to throw the ball out. Mullins steps back and slots the kick for the opening goal. Q1: 16 mins remaining: North Melbourne 0.0.0 – Brisbane 0.0.0 The Lions begin the game just as the would have wanted by winning the first centre clearance and locking the ball forward. The Kangaroos defence looks impenetrable from about 30m out. North Melbourne and Brisbane players meet at the centre circle as the 2025 AFLW grand final begins at Ikon Park. The Lions get the first clearance but Roos stalwart Emma Kearney tidies up. Game on! Bonnie Anderson has completed the national anthem and captains Jasmine Garner and Breanna Koenen are giving their teammates one last rev up before the North Melbourne and Brisbane players head to their positions with the AFLW grand final about to get under way at Ikon Park. Jasmine Garner leads North Melbourne on to Ikon Park with under 10 minutes until the first bounce. Former skipper Emma Kearney, as well as Jenna Bruton and Kim Rennie, are chasing a third flag of their own, while Libby Birch could become the first four-time premiership player in AFLW history. Eilish Sheerin is playing in her first AFLW grand final along with All-Australian goalsneak Blaithin Bogue and Eliza Shannon. The latter was the unlucky player last year when Emma Kearney returned to the side as the Kangaroos broke through for a first AFLW premiership. Brisbane are out on the field with captain Breanna Koenen leading the way. The Lions take 12 two-time premiership players into the match, including Ally Anderson, Shannon Campbell and Koenen. Neasa Dooley, and former West Coast pair Shanae Davison and Eleanor Hartill will be aiming to claim their first AFLW premiership. It’s North Melbourne against Brisbane: take three. But, as Jack Snape writes, the consistent brilliance of the Lions and Kangaroos has highlighted a lack of ambition from other AFLW clubs, whose failure to even spend what they are allowed to on coaches is an open secret in the competition. Few in the intimate footy industry wish to point fingers at other clubs, but multiple officials have told the Guardian this season some programs are not spending the full amount they are entitled to under the league’s rules. Kearney said there were “a lot of reasons” for the success of the Kangaroos and Lions including how the clubs embrace their women’s operations, the quality of their high-performance programs, the standard of coaching and a commitment to fitness. But she said “the way the clubs resource their programs” was most important. The Kangaroos and Lions players have completed their on-field warm ups and now it’s over to Peking Duk to get the crowd moving. No changes on either side as Mia King remains the unlucky player for the Kangaroos after injuring a knee in round nine. Coach Darren Crocker must have been tempted to recall the midfielder who earned the full 10 coaches’ votes when these sides met in round five this season. Here is how the two sides have been named. North Melbourne B: Libby Birch, Jasmine Ferguson HB: Emma Kearney, Eliza Shannon, Erika O’Shea C: Amy Smith, Ruby Tripodi, Taylah Gatt HF: Alice O’Loughlin, Blaithin Bogue, Jenna Bruton F: Tahlia Randall, Emma King R: Kim Rennie, Ash Riddell, Jasmine Garner Int: Kate Shierlaw, Bella Eddey, Tess Craven, Eilish Sheerin, Vikki Wall Brisbane B: Shannon Campbell, Jennifer Dunne HB: Breanna Koenen, Natalie Grider, Lily Postlethwaite C: Orla O’Dwyer, Alexandra Anderson, Charlotte Mullins HF: Courtney Hodder, Taylor Smith, Sophie Conway F: Catherine Svarc, Dakota Davidson R: Tahlia Hickie, Jade Ellenger, Isabel Dawes Int: Shanae Davison, Neasa Dooley, Ellie Hampson, Eleanor Hartill, Ruby Svarc The AFLW grand final is a sell-out for the third straight year – and the second consecutive season under lights at Ikon Park – with more than 12,500 fans set to watch North Melbourne and Brisbane lock horns yet again. Let’s hope the AFL can find a solution over the next 12 months for a suitable venue that would allow even more fans to be part of what should be a celebration of women’s football as much as the season decider between the competing clubs. The best things come in threes. Hello and welcome to live coverage of the 2025 AFLW grand final between North Melbourne and Brisbane as the pair of powerhouse sides meet in the decider for a third straight season. The premiership ledger over that time stands at one-all, which gives each team an opportunity to claim to be the ‘best of three’ and the standout of the stretch. Though, in truth, the Kangaroos have already raised the bar to lofty new heights while embarking on an undefeated run since stumbling at the last hurdle against the Lions in 2023. The all-conquering North Melbourne are now on the verge of etching their name in the record books as the first side in VFL/AFL/AFLW history to win every game in a season on their way to the premiership crown. The Kangaroos have got used to breaking records over the past two years as the reigning premiers have won 26 consecutive matches since their only blemish of a draw against the Cats in round two last year. Perhaps most importantly for the Roos in their season for the ages, they are now just one win away from becoming the AFLW’s first back-to-back premiers after their breakthrough triumph against the Lions last season. The perennial contenders Brisbane are in the unusual position of being the underdogs at Ikon Park despite playing in a fourth successive grand final. This is also their seventh AFLW decider out of the nine that have been staged. The Lions have their own slice – or two – of history within reach as their third women’s flag would equal the Crows’ tally. It would also ensure the club becomes the first to win both the AFL and AFLW premierships in the same year. But a victory for the Lions tonight, let’s face it, would be most memorable for being one of the all-time great upsets over an otherwise dominant side that has barely been challenged for two years. We’ll find out whether the Kangaroos can finish writing their own fairytale, or the Lions script a stunning plot twist, from the first bounce at Ikon Park in Melbourne at 7.45pm AEDT. In the meantime, get in touch with any comments, questions, thoughts and predictions for the AFLW grand final – shoot me an email or find me @martinpegan onBluesky orX. Let’s get into it!
