The Guardian | Sport | 2025-11-30
By Graham Searles
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2025/nov/30/rams-v-panthers-texans-v-colts-cardinals-v-bucs-and-more-nfl-week-13-live

Panthers shock Rams, Texans beat Colts and Bucs best Cardinals: NFL week 13 – as it happened
------------------------------------------------------------
(7-6) Carolina Panthers 31-28 Los Angeles Rams (9-3) (3-9) Cleveland Browns 8-26 San Francisco 49ers (9-4) (8-4) Indianapolis Colts 16-20 Houston Texans (7-5) (5-7) Miami Dolphins 21-17 New Orleans Saints (2-10) (3-9) New York Jets 27-24 Atlanta Falcons (4-8) (7-5) Tampa Bay Buccaneers 20-17 Arizona Cardinals (3-9) (1-11) Tennessee Titans 3-25 Jacksonville Jaguars (8-4) And that’s the end of that chapter. I’m really glad we got another upset after all the shocks midweek. The Panthers couldn’t look like more of a different team than the rabble that flopped against the 49ers on Monday. Nice to see Bryce Young pull off a huge win, maybe we might start seeing a few more of them as he continues to develop. Enjoy the rest of night’s action if you are staying locked in, goodnight! I’ll just leave you with another view of that frankly ridiculous Puka Nacua catch. It’s GOOD! Jets 27-24 Falcons, final score NICK FOLK! The walkoff 56-yard field goal seals the win for the Jets. They never held the lead in this one until the very last second. What an effort. Wow he only just made it, but they all count! Jets now 3-9 and the Falcons are 4-8. Atlanta really struggling this season despite having a solid roster. Dolphins 21-17 Saints, Titans 3-25 Jaguars, final scores So about that Cam Ward breakout game. The Titans lose a seventh in succession while the Jags leap to the top of the AFC South. The rookie QB finished 24/38 with 141 yards, no TDs, no picks. That is an average of 3.7 yards per completion. Yikes. Colts 16-20 Texans, final score Indy drop to 8-4 and are about to lose top spot in their division with the Jags about to win. Fourth straight W for Houston will feel great for Texans fans with CJ Stroud back in the lineup. They are 7-5 just one game back on the Colts and Jags in the AFC South. Browns 8-26 49ers, final score Routine win for San Fran that feels that bit more special with the Rams losing. They are 9-4 now after a third win in succession. TOUCHDOWN! Jets 24-24 Falcons 1:11, 4th quarter Tyrod Taylor tucks and runs for a 10-yard score. Jets keep fighting back they are yet to take a lead in this one but are on the ball again now. TOUCHDOWN! Dolphins 17-21 Saints 1:46, 4th quarter Oh dear. Tyler Shough drives the Saints to the verge of drawing level with a 15-yard touchdown pass to Devaughn Vele. And then with the two-point try he throws a pick that is returned for a score by Minkah Fitzpatrick. Hard luck for the rookie. So near and yet so very, very far. Buccaneers 20-17 Cardinals, final score The 7-5 Bucs snap their three-game losing run to stay top of the NFC South. They really needed that with the Panthers winning as well. Carolina snapping at their heels. Colts 16-20 Texans 1:51, 4th quarter Indy are on the ball with a crucial 3rd down upcoming. Nine yards to get. And the receiver gets very lucky not to fumble. He makes the catch and immediately drops it inexplicably when he would have moved the chains. Josh Downs will be kicking himself for making such an easy catch look very difficult. The Colts go for it on 4th down and the ball bounces off Josh Pittman’s hands. Looks like curtains for them, The upset is complete. Carolina win 31-28 and move to 7-6 while LA dip to 9-3, level with Chicago at the top of NFC. Seattle can move alongside those two with a win over the hapless Minnesota Vikings later too. The Panthers established the run and had faith in Bryce Young’s arm on two huge touchdowns on 4th down. Impressive stuff. It’s GOOD! Dolphins 19-11 Saints 6:01, 4th quarter Irish kicker Charlie Smyth boots it through from 56 yards out to make his first field goal in the NFL. The 24-year-old used to play Gaelic football before switching sports and going through the International player programme. Wow! Carolina have an excellent shot at pulling off an epic upset. Derrick Brown pulls off an incredible sack/fumble and scoops it upw. Three turnovers from Stafford today. That catch. How? It’s GOOD! Colts 16-20 Texans 8:41, 4th quarter Mike Badgley draws Indy a little closer with a 42-yard field goal. Panthers 31-28 Rams 5:01, 4th quarter LA are marching down field and into enemy territory after chain-moving passes to Colby Parkinson and Davante Adams. My, oh my! The Panthers gamble on 4th down again and HIT again! They risk it all for a second time and it works a treat. Tetairoa McMillan this time races by his defender and jogs in. Perfect throw from Bryce Young on the 43-yard score. Young is having a day with 196 yards and three touchdowns. TOUCHDOWN! Colts 13-20 Texans 7:51, 4th quarter Blocking, just sublime blocking. Nico Collins takes the carry on a reverse and has two men bounce defenders this way and that allowing Collins to walk in from seven yards out. Boos rain down. Fans not happy with struggles against their AFC South rivals. If the Colts do lose they look like they could fall a lot deeper with a rough schedule and the Jags and Texans coming into form. Houston would have a four-game winning streak with a W here while Jacksonville look set to make it three in a row, The Rams regain the lead! Kyren Williams races in from seven yards but that scoring drive was all about Puka Nacua. He is something else. There are one-handed grabs and there are Nacua one-handed grabs. The ball comes in and he snags it overhand, sort of plucks it out of the air for a 30-yard gain. Struggling to understand the physics of that one. Magic. Carolina Panthers 24-21 Los Angeles Rams Cleveland Browns 8-17 San Francisco 49ers Indianapolis Colts 13-13 Houston Texans Miami Dolphins 16-8 New Orleans Saints New York Jets 14-14 Atlanta Falcons Tampa Bay Buccaneers 17-10 Arizona Cardinals Tennessee Titans 3-25 Jacksonville Jaguars Just watching Jets kicker Nick Folk miss his first field goal of the season. Lot’s of empty seats at MetLife Stadium. Understandable. TOUCHDOWN! Titans 3-25 Jaguars 6:54, 3rd quarter Bhayshul Tuten gives the Jags a big, big lead with a banger up the gut for two yards. Jacksonville can go top of the AFC South with a win here and if the Colts lose. 13-13 still in Indy. TOUCHDOWN! Colts 13-13 Texans 2:51, 3rd quarter Indy draw level with a 12-yard touchdown from Daniel Jones to Tyler Warren. The rookie tight end is having a superb start to life in the NFL. That is his fourth touchdown of the season and is on pace to break the 1,000 yard mark. TOUCHDOWN! Browns 8-17 49ers 1:29, 3rd quarter Brock Purdy romps in on a keeper for the two-yard touchdown. San Francisco taking care of business while their rival Rams at the top of the NFC West are behind. 49ers fans very happy as it stands. Panthers 24-21 Rams 2:57, 3rd quarter Sadly the high-scoring action looks likely to slow down. It is absolutely pelting down in Charlotte. A running back’s dream. TOUCHDOWN! Buccaneers 17-3 Cardinals 3:56, 3rd quarter Bucky Irving is back with a bang! His first score of the season is a 13-yard scamper out to the left. Tampa on the way to breaking a three-game losing streak. TOUCHDOWN! Dolphins 16-8 Saints 10:40, 3rd quarter Tyler Shough gets the Saints on the board with a 17-yard strike to Chris Olave. He runs in an easy two-point conversion too. TOUCHDOWN! Jets 14-14 Falcons 8:58, 3rd quarter Tyrod Taylor digs in his back for his driver and hits an absolute beauty straight up the fairway. Adoni Mitchell is wide open on the goal line after the harrying defender falls over. He makes the grab and falls into the end zone. Huge 52-yard throw from Taylor right on the money. PUNT! Panthers 24-21 Rams 7:18, 3rd quarter Houston, we have a punt or rather Los Angeles. I have a history of putting my foot in it and have done so again. Immediately after saying Carolina are struggling with Stafford and company they force a three and out. TOUCHDOWN! Jets 7-14 Falcons 9:41, 3rd quarter Bijan Robinson is running all over the Jets. He scores with a brilliant jump cut out to the left. Absolutely cooks the defender who is helpessly stranded on the turf as Robinson glides by for a five-yard touchdown. Robinson has 103 yards on 15 carries. Strong. What a game this is turning out to be. Carolina are back out on offense and moving the ball steadily. Nothing special. Until. Until they roll the dice big on 4th down. Jalen Coker speeds by his man on the right sideline and takes the catch for a 33-yard touchdown. Gutsy play but you have to risk it for the biscuit. Especially when the defense can’t land a glove on the Rams outside of two big interceptions. Bit of a slow burn so far minus the barnburner in Carolina. The scores: Carolina Panthers 17-21 Los Angeles Rams Cleveland Browns 8-10 San Francisco 49ers Indianapolis Colts 6-10 Houston Texans Miami Dolphins 16-0 New Orleans Saints New York Jets 7-7 Atlanta Falcons Tampa Bay Buccaneers 10-3 Arizona Cardinals Tennessee Titans 3-18 Jacksonville Jaguars Looks like my hopes of a Tennessee upset are falling rather flat. Cam Ward is averaging about four yards per play compared to Trevor Lawrence’s 12. Woah. It is all popping off as a fight breaks out on the sideline. A late hit from Arden Key on Lawrence sparks the melee. Key is penalised for roughing the passer. Little boots a field goal through from 45 yards. TOUCHDOWN! Jets 7-7 Falcons 0:09, 2nd quarter Atlanta are finally on the board with a one-yard score from Tyler Allgeier. It’s GOOD! Browns 8-10 49ers, half-time There is a gale blowing in Cleveland. Matt Gay has some help from the post to give San Francisco the lead at the break. The refs didn’t seem sure whether it had gone in but he ball blasts the post and goes through from 25 yards out. TOUCHDOWN! Panthers 14-21 Rams 1:55, 2nd quarter It is raining points in Carolina. Blake Corum this time blasts up the middle for a two-yard score. Well, you can’t throw it to Adams EVERY time can you. Variety is the spice of life. Not a lot of defense being played the possession chart reads: touchdown, touchdown, touchdown, touchdown, field goal, touchdown. The punters have their feet up, nice work if you can get it. TOUCHDOWN! Colts 6-10 Texans 5:01, 2nd quarter Nick Chubb blasts in from four yards to hand Houston the lead back. Nice to see the veteran bruiser still making plays. TOUCHDOWN! Browns 8-7 49ers 0:39, 2nd quarter Strong second start for Shedeur Sanders who uncorks a 34-yard deep ball to Harold Fannin. Quinshon Judkins just makes the two-pointer. TOUCHDOWN! Buccaneers 10-0 Cardinals 1:48, 2nd quarter Drama in Tampa. A touchdown is chalked off after a holding penalty on Payne Durham. He already had his man beat but needlessly grabs him. Bucky Irving, who walked the ball in, will not slightly peeved by his lineman. Speaking of linemen … Baker Mayfield moves the Bucs back to the goal line and Tristan Wirfs lines up as an eligible receiver. The big man kicks out the left and makes the grab! Two-yard touchdown. It’s GOOD! Panthers 17-14 Rams 5:31, 2nd quarter Ryan Fitzgerald ties a bow on a monster 7min 12sec drive with a 33-yard boot. Carolina leading arguably the best team in the NFL. A big bounce back after looking very shabby on offense last week. Bryce Young is 6/9 for 73 yards, one score and no picks. Solid. TOUCHDOWN! Colts 7-3 Texans 8:51, 2nd quarter It was a rather rough watch for offensive gurus in Indy for a minute there. The Colts turn it over on downs and CJ Stroud on the very next play throws an interception. Daniel Jones rights the ship on his next drive with a 19-yard strike to Alec Pierce. Panthers 14-14 Rams 10:11, 2nd quarter Lovely bit of playcalling by Carolina to move them into the red zone. Bryce Young fakes the toss to Chuba Hubbard and scrambles for 24 yards. He is laughing his head off, doesn’t get easier than that, not a defender in sight. TOUCHDOWN! Panthers 14-14 Rams 12:51, 2nd quarter The Stafford/Adams roadshow is back on! The QB hits his man from seven yards out to deliver the receiver’s 14th score of the season. Leads the league in touchdown receptions. Quite the comeback at 32 after some slightly down seasons with the Raiders and Jets. Colts 0-3 Texans 13:12, 2nd quarter Little of note in this one so far. Star Colts cornerback Sauce Gardner has exited with an injury. TOUCHDOWN! Titans 3-15 Jaguars 14:45, 2nd quarter Jacksonville are looking very good so far after Trevor Lawrence throws another touchdown. Brenton Strange makes the nine-yard grab. The Jags go for two and get it on a Lawrence keeper. The Titans may feel a little aggrieved after giving the ball up on a fumble. The runner was judged to be down by contact. The Jags challenged and it was overturned. Looked probably the right call but still tough to take after the refs erred on the side of caution at first. TOUCHDOWN! Jets 7-0 Falcons 13:58, 2nd quarter New York strike first. Breece Hall punches it in a two-yard trot. That score was set up by some magic on special teams. A muffed punt from Atlanta recovered by Qwan’tez Stiggers who almost scored himself. Top work. The Panthers pick off Stafford again only this time they get a touchdown to boot. The throw is too short and Mike Johnson sneaks in and pinches it. He runs it back 50 yards and the lead. Carolina picking up from where they left off against the 49ers. Three picks on Brock Purdy led to little in that loss but they are making them pay now. PICK! Panthers 7-7 Rams 3:11, 1st quarter Might have put the mockers on Stafford with the MVP chat. He is picked off in the end zone for his first interception since week 3. Nick Scott makes the play on a wobbler for the easiest of picks. TOUCHDOWN! Titans 3-7 Jaguars 1:04, 1st quarter Told you Meyers was doing well. He catches a three-yard pass to give Jacksonville the lead. Titans 3-0 Jaguars 3:51, 1st quarter The Jags are knocking on the door. Jakobi Meyers catches one in the centre of the field then runs it up near the goalline. The receiver has been a great pickup. Really elevated Jacksonville’s offense. Panthers 7-7 Rams 6:11, 1st quarter The Rams are quickly back into the red zone. Davante Adams hooks up with Stafford again with a darting run across the field for a 32-yard pickup, TOUCHDOWN! Browns 0-7 49ers 8:51, 1st quarter Christian McCaffrey’s fine scoring season continues with a goal line run. That is his 13th touchdown of the year. TOUCHDOWN! Panthers 7-7 Rams 7:51, 1st quarter Carolina hit back immediately with a home run from Chuba Hubbard. The running back catches a short pass out to the right and he just speeds through LA’s defense. They stacked the box there and were punished. Excellent play call. It’s GOOD! Titans 3-0 Jaguars 5:06, 1st quarter Cam Ward’s day is going well so far too. He has moved the Titans into the red zone. And is unlucky not to have a touchdown. Gunnar Helm catches a beautifully thrown deep pass but is pushed out of bounds. Tennessee settle for a 28-yard boot from Joey Slye. TOUCHDOWN! Dolphins 7-0 Saints 10:42, 1st quarter Devon Achane gets Miami off to a flier. He bursts free for a 29-yard scorching touchdown. New Orleans had no chance once he got into space. Matt Stafford cashes in the generous field position to who else than his new favourite target Davante Adams. Poor Kyren Williams can’t get a look in on the goalline. Automatic touchdown. The MVP is looking locked in for Stafford. Buccaneers 0-0 Cardinals 10:42, 1st quarter Baker Mayfield has is left arm in a large sleeve looking like he has been hitting the gym rather lop-sidedly. The shoulder injury on his non-throwing arm doesn’t appear to be affecting him though. He moves the Bucs to midfield with a short pass to rookie Emeka Egbuka. Panthers 0-0 Rams 14:31, 1st quarter And we’re off! Excellent start for the Rams after a brilliant kick-off return and a personal foul against the Panthers. They start from Carolina’s 40-yard line. Unwise to give this offense such an early leg up. In more Da Bears news have a dive before kick-off into Andrew Lawrence’s fine piece about the ‘85 title greats. One defense shining like those legends lives in Houston. They will be very excited about lining up against Daniel Jones today. The quarterback has a mysterious fractured leg but is good to go apparently. Could be choppy for Indy if Houston get after him. CJ Stroud returns at quarterback for the Texans too. Hello, football fans! What a treat week 13 has been already. Chicago being a Super Bowl contender certainly wasn’t on my bingo card but football is like a box of chocolates. Delicious. The action continues with a selection of seven games at 12pm CST/1pm EST/6pm GMT (home teams listed first): (6-6) Carolina Panthers v Los Angeles Rams (9-2) (3-8) Cleveland Browns v San Francisco 49ers (8-4) (8-3) Indianapolis Colts v Houston Texans (6-5) (4-7) Miami Dolphins v New Orleans Saints (2-9) (2-9) New York Jets v Atlanta Falcons (4-7) (6-5) Tampa Bay Buccaneers v Arizona Cardinals (3-8) (1-10) Tennessee Titans v Jacksonville Jaguars (7-4) The upsets came thick and fast through Thanksgiving and Black Friday so what are the chances we have a few more shocks? Let’s take a walk with the Tennessee Titans. They played Seattle close last week. A garbage time score gilded the lily somewhat but rookie quarterback Cam Ward had the best came of his young career. So today just may be that little bit better. The Ward breakout game is coming. Jacksonville have to avoid complacency or they risk coming a cropper to that fiendish old devil: the curse of S’posed to*. The Jags will be expecting to beat the Titans relatively easily. Yet there is a decent amount of pressure with Kansas City losing to Dallas on Thursday as a win keeps their postseason destiny firmly in their control. One game at a time and all that but if Tennessee can burst out of the traps all bets could be off. Let’s see shall we. (*credit: Dave Dameshek)
