The Guardian | Sport | 2025-12-02
By Jack Snape
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/dec/03/tasmanias-113bn-afl-stadium-ikely-to-be-given-green-light-at-parliamentary-vote

Tasmania’s $1.13bn AFL stadium likely to be given green light at parliamentary vote
------------------------------------------------------------
A controversial $1.13bn stadium on the Hobart waterfront is likely to go ahead after three crossbenchers expressed their support for the project, ahead of the decisive parliamentary vote on Thursday. Bec Thomas, an independent member of the Tasmanian legislative council, revealed in a statement on Wednesday morning additional conditions provided by the government means she will vote in favour of the Macquarie Point proposal. Fellow independents Casey Hiscutt and Tanya Rattray also backed the project during Wednesday’s debate in the upper house, clearing a path for the project which has been pursued since 2019. Their support now means, barring an 11th-hour backflip from a member of Tasmania’s upper house, the project will go ahead, enabling the Devils to enter the AFL in 2028. “This has been the hardest decision I’ve ever had to make,” Thomas said. “For me, the question has been under what conditions could it possibly earn support. That’s why my support for the project is strictly conditional on economic, governance, design and community safeguards that seek to protect the welfare of Tasmanians.” Thomas claimed to have secured a fixed cap on the state’s contribution to the project, additional independent oversight, more funding for grassroots sport and targets for local jobs as part of the project. The crossbenchers’ support tipped the balance of the 15-member upper house towards the project, which is a condition of the AFL’s agreement with the Tasmanian government to give the state a licence to play in the national competition. It also devastated the huge group who oppose the stadium proposal, which was widely criticised by an independent planning assessment in September. Greens’ MLC Cassy O’Connor said on Wednesday afternoon she had to change her speech to the upper house at the last minute. “We know now how the vote will almost certainly go,” she said. “So laying out all the evidence, the irrefutable, independent, expert evidence, for why this order [for the stadium] should be resoundingly rejected seems moot now.” The stadium needs the votes of eight MLCs in Tasmania’s upper house, after already winning support of the lower house last month. The independent-dominated 15-member upper house chamber has three representatives from each of the Labor and Liberal parties which support the stadium, but the president – Labor’s Craig Farrell – will not ordinarily vote. A final vote on the stadium is expected on Thursday.
