The Guardian | Sport | 2025-12-03
By Ali Martin in Brisbane
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/dec/03/australia-second-ashes-test-brisbane-gabba-cricket-team-starting-xi

Pat Cummins poised to return for Australia in second Ashes Test at Gabba
------------------------------------------------------------
The challenge for England could be set to increase amid a growing belief that Pat Cummins will be given the green light to return for Australia this week in the second Ashes Test at the Gabba. Cummins, 32, was absent from the series opener in Perth as he underwent the final stages of rehabilitation from a lower back stress injury that was first detected back in July. Steve Smith stepped up to captain as the hosts secured a 1-0 lead with an eight-wicket victory inside two days. But despite being left out of Australia’s initial squad for the day-night second Test in Brisbane, Cummins still travelled with the team and appears to have ticked every box in training since. Australia, however, have since said they will not name an XI until the toss at 1.30pm local time on Thursday. The question now is whether a hug between Cummins and head coach Andrew McDonald during a leadership meeting after training was confirmation of a return or simply done to throw on-looking reporters. Smith and chief selector George Bailey were also part of this pitch-side chat, before a fire alarm saw the ground briefly evacuated. Speaking earlier in the day, Smith said: “He’s looked pretty good to me, the way he’s bowled in the nets. Obviously games are different intensity but he’s tracking really nicely, he knows his body well. We’ll wait and see but like I said he’s close.” If Cummins is cleared to play then Australia will likely face a choice between dropping spinner Nathan Lyon and playing an all-seam attack – as occurred during their most recent pink ball Test in Jamaica back in July – or asking Brendan Doggett to step aside after a five-wicket debut in Perth. Smith added: “We’ll look at the surface and sum things up from there. [The Gabba] is a place where Nathan has done really well in the past, he’s a quality bowler. We’ll weigh up the options and see how we go.” Asked about the possibility of Cummins returning, England captain Ben Stokes replied: “Pat is awesome. Has been for a very, very, very long time. Whatever XI they go with, we’ll still be going in there to try and get the win this week.” At least one change to Australia’s XI is guaranteed, with Usman Khawaja having already been ruled out of the match after failing to overcome a back injury. Josh Inglis, who usually bats in the middle order, is seen as the favourite to come in, meaning Travis Head may continue up top. England know all about Inglis and not just from his early years in the Yorkshire academy. Having been born in Leeds, but moved to Perth with his family at 15, the right-hander struck an unbeaten 120 from 86 balls in Lahore back in February to terminate their Champions Trophy hopes. Inglis also put on a show against the England Lions a fortnight ago, crashing 125 not out at Lilac Hill to guide a Cricket Australia XI to an eight-wicket win in a four-day tour match. In form, and having scored a century on his Test debut in Sri Lanka this year, he is a dangerous customer. Smith added: “[Inglis] is obviously a pretty attacking batsman and did really well on his debut in Sri Lanka. He plays fast bowling really nicely. So if he gets his opportunity I’m sure he’ll do really well for us”.
