The Guardian | Sport | 2025-11-30
By Guardian staff and agencies
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/nov/30/eli-katoa-hopeful-nrl-return-pays-tribute-to-partner-storm-after-brain-surgery

Eli Katoa hopeful of NRL return as he pays tribute to partner and Storm after brain surgery
------------------------------------------------------------
Eli Katoa remains hopeful of a return to the NRL, saying his recovery from brain surgery is “going well” as he paid tribute to his partner and fans for supporting him. Katoa was ruled out of the 2026 NRL season after undergoing emergency surgery in New Zealand to treat a brain bleed that he suffered while playing for Tonga in the Pacific Championships in early November. The Melbourne Storm second-rower’s career was thrown into doubt after he suffered three head knocks in 90 minutes and required oxygen on the sidelines. Katoa spent more than two weeks in hospital before consulting with specialists in Melbourne, who advised that he not play next season. The 25-year-old is continuing his rehabilitation and recovery under the watch of the Storm medical staff, and said he hoped to play again. “I’m back at home at the moment and I’m in a good place now,” Katoa posted on Instagram. “My recovery is going well and hopefully I can keep ticking all of the boxes that I need!” Katoa thanked people for their messages and the Storm club for its support, and included a tribute to his partner Tuitofa Aloua. “This woman has been amazing, strong and sticking by my side through it all,” he wrote. “A special thank you to the Storm for all of the help and support that you guys are continuing to provide, I appreciate it. “And to the Storm fans, in God’s timing ‘I’ll be back soon’.” Ryan Papenhuyzen, who also won’t play with Melbourne next season after walking away from his contract, was one of Katoa’s teammates to respond. “Health is wealth king, look after yourself my bro,” wrote the star full-back, who has also endured career-threatening injuries. Katoa’s post included some confronting images of him in hospital, showing where his head had been shaved for the surgery. The loss of Katoa and Papenhuyzen, representative prop Nelson Asofa-Solomona and promising half Jonah Pezet puts a dent in Melbourne’s aspirations of winning a title after two successive grand-final losses. The Storm will receive salary cap relief for Katoa, but the Dally M second-rower of the year is almost impossible to replace. The NRL has completed an investigation into Tonga’s handling of his injuries, but is yet to release its findings. With Australian Associated Press
