The Guardian | Sport | 2025-12-03
By Luke McLaughlin
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/dec/03/rugby-world-cup-2027-pool-draw-australia-new-zealand-england-wales

Hosts Australia to face New Zealand in Rugby World Cup pool as England draw Wales
------------------------------------------------------------
The host nation Australia will face their traditional rivals New Zealand at the men’s Rugby World Cup in 2027. The Wallabies, hosting a second men’s tournament, were guaranteed to face a top-ranked nation in Pool A due to their world ranking of seventh and the renewal of their fierce rivalry with the All Blacks is perhaps the most appetising possible outcome from the draw made in Sydney on Wednesday. The potential for a “Bledisloe Cup” opening match to kick off the global showpiece, on 1 October 2027 in Perth, will be a hugely attractive prospect. Chile, playing at their second Rugby World Cup after their debut in France in 2023, and debutants Hong Kong are also in Pool A. England, who won the tournament in Australia 22 years ago, have been pitted against Wales, with Tonga and Zimbabwe the other sides in Pool F. Wales defeated England at their home tournament a decade ago before a second loss, to Australia, consigned the hosts to an early exit. South Africa, ranked No 1 in the world and champions at the past two editions, have been drawn in Pool B against Italy, Georgia and Romania. Rassie Erasmus’s powerful team are widely backed to win a third straight title. Ireland and Scotland have been thrown together again. They met in Paris at the 2023 edition and at the 2019 tournament in Japan. Ireland’s 36-14 victory two years ago sent Gregor Townsend’s side home at the pool stage. Portugal, one of the star turns in 2023, and Uruguay complete the Pool D lineup. Argentina, Fiji, Spain and Canada are in Pool C and France, Japan, USA and Samoa are in Pool E. There will be 52 matches, up from 48 in 2023, with the final on 13 November in Sydney. The match schedule will be revealed on 3 February 2026.
