The Guardian | Sport | 2025-12-02
By Luke McLaughlin
https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2025/dec/02/mens-rugby-world-cup-2027-how-the-draw-will-work-and-the-new-format-explained

Men’s Rugby World Cup 2027: how the draw will work and the new format explained
------------------------------------------------------------
How big will the Australia 2027 tournament be? Kicking off on 1 October 2027, the men’s event will feature 24 teams instead of 20, and will be the first to include a round of 16. Each tournament since 2003 has included 20 competing nations, and the previous format moved straight from the pool stage to the quarter-finals. There will be a total of 52 matches in 2027, up from 48. How will 24 teams change the format? Instead of four pools of five there are six pools of four. The eventual winners will still be obliged to play seven matches to claim the trophy, but will play one pool match fewer, before the last-16 game for a place in the last eight. The top two in the six pools qualify for the knockouts, plus the four best third-placed teams. What decides who ends up in which pool? Teams are split into four bands dependent on their world ranking in the draw that takes place at 9am UK time on Wednesday. As hosts, Australia are automatically assigned to Pool A, and will play in the opening game at Perth Stadium, but everything else is up for grabs. What can hosts Australia expect? The Wallabies had a final chance to climb the rankings last month in the autumn internationals: but a winless trip to Europe for Joe Schmidt’s side confirmed their Band 2 status with Scotland, Fiji, Italy, Wales and Japan. The hosts, therefore, are destined to face a powerful Band 1 nation in their pool: one of South Africa, New Zealand, England, Ireland, France or Argentina. Andy Farrell’s Ireland have fallen from second to fourth this year, while England’s 11-match winning streak has seen them climb from seventh to third. What about Scotland and Wales? Scotland’s dramatic recent defeat by the Pumas ended any hope they had of reaching Band 1, while Wales clung on in Band 2 despite losing three out of four autumn internationals, including a 73-0 thrashing by the Springboks last Saturday. A late 24-23 win against Japan in Cardiff on 15 November crucially removed any danger of Wales dropping into Band 3 for the draw and the prospect of a far harder pool. Any dark horses in Bands 3 and 4? Band 3 consists of Georgia, Uruguay, Spain, USA, Chile and Tonga, with Samoa, Portugal, Romania, debutants Hong Kong China, Zimbabwe and Canada in Band 4. Georgia will be the team to avoid in Band 3, ranked 13th, and 14th-ranked Uruguay are traditionally tough opponents, while their South American rivals Chile return after their debut in 2023. One of the most compelling subplots is the potential for Samoa, in Band 4 having squeaked through qualifying – being drawn against Steve Borthwick’s England, which would open the possibility of Manu Tuilagi lining up against his former team. Tuilagi, now playing for Bayonne, will qualify for Samoa early in 2027. Also in Band 4, Portugal’s reappearance will be eagerly anticipated after they lit up the 2023 tournament in France, beating Fiji in dramatic style and drawing with Georgia. Is the draw potentially unfair to some pool winners in the last 16? There are a few wider intricacies to consider. The winners of pools A, B, C and D will meet a third-place team in the round of 16, while the winners of pools E and F will play a side that finished second in their pool. “While on the surface that may seem slightly unfair, that imbalance is addressed in the next round,” World Rugby states. “The team that wins Pool A will face a third-place team in the Round of 16, but in the quarter-finals could potentially meet the winner of Pool B if that team wins their round of 16 match.” The winners of Pool E and Pool F will, in theory, have a harder task in the last 16, but cannot face a pool winner until the semi-finals. Will the draw change the favourites to win the World Cup? The dominant form of South Africa, winners of the past two men’s tournaments, makes them strongly fancied to win a third straight title although Borthwick’s England, if they continue on an upward curve, will be confident of a deep run. Much will change between now and 2027 but the favourites can start planning in earnest once the draw is made.
